Fine-Tune an Image Segmentation Model with a Custom Dataset blogpost (#234)
huggingface/blog: fine-tune-segformer.md

---

> title: Fine-Tune an Image Segmentation Model with a Custom Dataset

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: Fine-Tune a Semantic Segmentation Model with a Custom Dataset
```

> thumbnail: /blog/assets/54_fine_tune_segformer/thumb.png

Reviewer: Super cool thumbnail!

---

<h1>

> 	Fine-Tune an Image Segmentation Model with a Custom Dataset

Reviewer: ```suggestion
	Fine-Tune a Semantic Segmentation Model with a Custom Dataset
```

        </div>
    </a>
</div>

<a target="_blank" href="https://colab.research.google.com/drive/1BImTyBjW3KtvHGVcjGpYYFZdRGXzM3-j?usp=sharing">
    <img src="https://colab.research.google.com/assets/colab-badge.svg" alt="Open In Colab"/>
</a>

**This blogpost shows how you can fine-tune a semantic segmentation model with a custom dataset. Our goal is to build a model for a pizza delivery robot, so it can see where to drive and recognize obstacles 🍕🤖. First, we'll label a dataset of sidewalk images and upload the results to the Hugging Face hub using [Segments.ai](https://segments.ai?utm_source=hf&utm_medium=colab&utm_campaign=sem_seg). Then we'll use the dataset to fine-tune a pre-trained Segformer model using [`🤗 transformers`](https://huggingface.co/transformers).**

Semantic segmentation is the task of classifying each pixel in an image. You can see it as a more precise way of classifying an image. It has a wide range of use cases in fields such as medical imaging and autonomous driving. For example, for our pizza delivery robot, it is important to know exactly where the sidewalk is in an image, not just whether there is a sidewalk or not.

> Because image segmentation is a type of classification, the network architectures that are used for image classification and image segmentation are very similar. In 2014, Long et al. used convolutional neural networks to create a [fully convolutional network](https://arxiv.org/abs/1411.4038) for image segmentation. More recently, Transformers have been used for image classification (e.g. [ViT](https://huggingface.co/blog/fine-tune-vit)), and now they're now also being used for image segmentation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because semantic segmentation is a type of classification, the network architectures that are used for image classification and semantic segmentation are very similar. In 2014, a seminal paper by Long et al. used [convolutional neural networks](https://arxiv.org/abs/1411.4038) for semantic segmentation. More recently, Transformers have been used for image classification (e.g. [ViT](https://huggingface.co/blog/fine-tune-vit)), and now they're now also being used for semantic segmentation.
```

Author: Moved the link to "a seminal paper"

> [SegFormer](https://arxiv.org/abs/2105.15203) is a model for semantic segmentation introduced by Xie et al in 2021. It has a hierarchical Transformer encoder that doesn't use positional encodings (in contrast to ViT) and a simple multi-layer perceptron decoder. SegFormer achieves state-of-the-art performance on multiple common datasets. Let's see how it performs for sidewalk images in our pizza delivery robot.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[SegFormer](https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers/model_doc/segformer) is a model for semantic segmentation introduced by Xie et al in 2021. It has a hierarchical Transformer encoder that doesn't use positional encodings (in contrast to ViT) and a simple multi-layer perceptron decoder. SegFormer achieves state-of-the-art performance on multiple common datasets. Let's see how it performs for sidewalk images in our pizza delivery robot.
```

<figure class="image table text-center m-0 w-full">
  <medium-zoom background="rgba(0,0,0,.7)" alt="Pizza delivery robot segmenting a scene" src="assets/54_fine_tune_segformer/pizza-scene.png"></medium-zoom>
</figure>

# 1. Create/choose a dataset

The first step in any ML project is assembling a good dataset. In order to train a semantic segmentation model, we need a dataset with semantic segmentation labels. We can either use an existing dataset from the Hugging Face Hub, such as [ADE20k](https://huggingface.co/datasets/scene_parse_150), or create our own dataset.

For our pizza delivery robot, we could use an existing autonomous driving dataset such as [CityScapes](https://www.cityscapes-dataset.com/) or [BDD100K](https://bdd100k.com/). However, these datasets were captured by cars driving on the road. Since our delivery robot will be driving on the sidewalk, there will be a mismatch between the images in these datasets and the data our robot will see in the real world. 

> We don't want our delivery robot to get confused, so we'll create our own semantic segmentation dataset using images captured on sidewalks. In the next steps, we'll show how you can label the images we captured. If you just want to use our finished labeled dataset, you can skip the "Create your own dataset" section and only run the cell under "Use a dataset from the Hub".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We don't want our delivery robot to get confused, so we'll create our own semantic segmentation dataset using images captured on sidewalks. In the next steps, we'll show how you can label the images we captured. If you just want to use our finished labeled dataset, you can skip the "Create your own dataset" section and continue from "Use a dataset from the Hub".
```

## Create your own dataset

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

*Note that the conversion can take a while, depending on the size of your dataset.*

```python
from segments.huggingface import release2dataset

release = segments_client.get_release(dataset_identifier, release_name)
hf_dataset = release2dataset(release)
```

If we inspect the features of the new dataset, we can see the image column and the corresponding label. The label consists of two parts: a list of annotations and a segmentation bitmap. The annotation corresponds to the different objects in the image. For each object, the annotation contains an `id` and a `category_id`. The segmentation bitmap is an image where each pixel contains the `id` of the object at that pixel. More information can be found in the [relevant docs](https://docs.segments.ai/reference/sample-and-label-types/label-types#segmentation-labels).

> For semantic segmentation, we need a semantic bitmap with a `category_id` for each pixel. We'll use the `get_semantic_bitmap` function from the Segments.ai SDK to convert the bitmaps to semantic bitmaps. In order to apply this function to all the rows in our dataset, we'll use `dataset.map`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For semantic segmentation, we need a semantic bitmap with a `category_id` for each pixel. We'll use the `get_semantic_bitmap` function from the Segments.ai SDK to convert the bitmaps to semantic bitmaps. In order to apply this function to all the rows in our dataset, we'll use [`dataset.map`](https://huggingface.co/docs/datasets/package_reference/main_classes#datasets.Dataset.map).
```

            )
    }

semantic_dataset = hf_dataset.map(
    convert_segmentation_bitmap,
)
```

The SegFormer model we're going to fine-tune later expects certain names for the features. For convenience, we'll already match this format now. Thus, we'll rename the `image` feature to `pixel_values`, the `label.segmentation_bitmap` to `label` and discard the other features.

```python
semantic_dataset = semantic_dataset.rename_column('image', 'pixel_values')
semantic_dataset = semantic_dataset.rename_column('label.segmentation_bitmap', 'label')
semantic_dataset = semantic_dataset.remove_columns(['name', 'uuid', 'status', 'label.annotations'])
```

We can now push the transformed dataset to the Hugging Face Hub. That way, your team and the Hugging Face community can make use of it. In the next section, we'll see how you can load the dataset from the hub.

```python
hf_dataset_identifier = f"{hf_username}/{dataset_name}"

semantic_dataset.push_to_hub(hf_dataset_identifier)
```

## Use a dataset from the Hub

If you don't want to create your own dataset, but found a suitable dataset for your use case on the Hugging Face Hub, you can define the identifier here. 

> For example, you can use the full labeled sidewalk dataset.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, you can use the full labeled sidewalk dataset. Note that you can check out the examples [directly in your browser](https://huggingface.co/datasets/segments/sidewalk-semantic).
```

```python
hf_dataset_identifier = "segments/sidewalk-semantic"
```

# 2. Load and prepare the Hugging Face dataset for training

Now that we've created a new dataset and pushed it to the Hugging Face Hub, we can load the dataset in a single line.

```python
from datasets import load_dataset

ds = load_dataset(hf_dataset_identifier)
```

Let's shuffle the dataset and split the dataset in a train and test set.

```python
ds = ds.shuffle(seed=1)
ds = ds["train"].train_test_split(test_size=0.2)
train_ds = ds["train"]
test_ds = ds["test"]
```

We'll extract the number of labels and the human-readable ids, so we can configure the segmentation model correctly later on.

```python
import json
from huggingface_hub import cached_download, hf_hub_url

repo_id = f"datasets/{hf_dataset_identifier}"
filename = "id2label.json"
id2label = json.load(open(cached_download(hf_hub_url(repo_id, filename)), "r"))
id2label = {int(k): v for k, v in id2label.items()}
label2id = {v: k for k, v in id2label.items()

num_labels = len(id2label)
```

## Feature extractor & data augmentation

> A SegFormer model expects the input to be of a certain shape. To transform our training data to match the expected shape, we can use the `SegFormerFeatureExtractor`. We could use the `ds.map` function to apply the feature extractor to the whole training dataset in advance, but this can be very slow. Instead, we'll use a *transform*, which will prepare a batch of data for our model, but only when at the moment when that data is actually used (on-the-fly).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A SegFormer model expects the input to be of a certain shape. To transform our training data to match the expected shape, we can use `SegFormerFeatureExtractor`. We could use the `ds.map` function to apply the feature extractor to the whole training dataset in advance, but this can be very slow. Instead, we'll use a *transform*, which will prepare a batch of data for our model, but only when at the moment when that data is actually used (on-the-fly).
```

Reviewer 2: It's not "slow" :p Using a transform helps saving disk space and allows training to start directly without further data preprocessing

Author: I copied the wording from [https://huggingface.co/blog/fine-tune-vit](https://huggingface.co/blog/fine-tune-vit), but I'll update it ;)

> In our transform, we'll also define some data augmentations to make our model more resilient to different lighting conditions. We'll use the `ColorJitter` function from `torchvision` to randomly change the brightness, contrast, saturation, and hue of the images in the batch.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In our transform, we'll also define some data augmentations to make our model more resilient to different lighting conditions. We'll use the `ColorJitter` [function](https://pytorch.org/vision/main/generated/torchvision.transforms.ColorJitter.html) from `torchvision` to randomly change the brightness, contrast, saturation, and hue of the images in the batch.
```

```python
from torchvision.transforms import ColorJitter

> from transformers import (
>     SegformerFeatureExtractor,
> )

Reviewer: ```suggestion
from transformers import SegformerFeatureExtractor
```

feature_extractor = SegformerFeatureExtractor()
jitter = ColorJitter(brightness=0.25, contrast=0.25, saturation=0.25, hue=0.1) 

def train_transforms(example_batch):
    images = [jitter(x) for x in example_batch['pixel_values']]
    labels = [x for x in example_batch['label']]
    inputs = feature_extractor(images, labels)
    return inputs

def val_transforms(example_batch):
    images = [x for x in example_batch['pixel_values']]
    labels = [x for x in example_batch['label']]
    inputs = feature_extractor(images, labels)
    return inputs

# Set transforms
train_ds.set_transform(train_transforms)
test_ds.set_transform(val_transforms)
```

# 3. Fine-tune a SegFormer model

## Load the model to fine-tune

> The SegFormer authors define 5 models with increasing sizes: B0 to B5. The following chart from the SegFormer shows the performance of these different models on the ADE20K dataset, compared to other models.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The SegFormer authors define 5 models with increasing sizes: B0 to B5. The following chart (taken from the original paper) shows the performance of these different models on the ADE20K dataset, compared to other models.
```

<figure class="image table text-center m-0 w-full">
  <medium-zoom background="rgba(0,0,0,.7)" alt="SegFormer model variants compared with other segmentation models" src="assets/54_fine_tune_segformer/segformer.png"></medium-zoom>
  <figcaption><a href="https://arxiv.org/abs/2105.15203">Source</a></figcaption>
</figure>

> Here, we'll load the smallest SegFormer model (B0), pre-trained on ImageNet-1k.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here, we'll load the smallest SegFormer model (B0), pre-trained on ImageNet-1k. It's only about 14MB in size!
```

```python
from transformers import SegformerForSemanticSegmentation

pretrained_model_name = "nvidia/mit-b0" 
model = SegformerForSemanticSegmentation.from_pretrained(
    pretrained_model_name,
    num_labels=num_labels,
    id2label=id2label,
    label2id=label2id
)
```

## Set up the Trainer

To fine-tune the model on our data, we'll use Hugging Face's [Trainer API](https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers/main_classes/trainer). In order to use a Trainer, we need to set up the training configuration, and an evalutation metric.

First, we'll set up the [`TrainingArguments`](https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers/main_classes/trainer#transformers.TrainingArguments). This defines all training hyperparameters, such as learning rate and the number of epochs, frequency to save the model and so on. We also specify to push the model to the hub after training (`push_to_hub=True`) and specify a model name (`hub_model_id`).

```python
from transformers import TrainingArguments, get_constant_schedule
from torch.optim import AdamW

epochs = 5
lr = 0.00006
batch_size = 2

optimizer = AdamW(model.parameters(), lr=lr)

> scheduler = get_constant_schedule(optimizer)

Reviewer: Te Trainer will use AdamW by default, any reason you want a constant schedule?

Author: Ah no not really, I'll leave it out.
Btw, the paper mentions
>  The learning rate was set to an initial value of 0.00006 and then used
a “poly” LR schedule with factor 1.0 by default.

hub_model_id = "segformer-b0-finetuned-segments-sidewalk-2"

training_args = TrainingArguments(
    "segformer-b0-finetuned-segments-sidewalk-outputs",
    learning_rate=lr,
    num_train_epochs=epochs,
    per_device_train_batch_size=batch_size,
    per_device_eval_batch_size=batch_size,
    save_total_limit=3,
    evaluation_strategy="steps",
    save_strategy="steps",
    save_steps=20,
    eval_steps=20,
    logging_steps=1,
    eval_accumulation_steps=5,
    load_best_model_at_end=True,
    push_to_hub=True,
    hub_model_id=hub_model_id,
    hub_strategy="end",
)
```

> Next, we'll define a function that computes the evaluation metric we want to work with. Because we're doing semantic segmentation, we'll use the mean Intersection over Union (mIoU). IoU represents the overlap of segmentation masks. Mean IoU is the average of the IoU of all semantic classes. Take a look at [this blogpost](https://www.jeremyjordan.me/evaluating-image-segmentation-models/) for an overview of evaluation metrics for image segmentation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, we'll define a function that computes the evaluation metric we want to work with. Because we're doing semantic segmentation, we'll use the mean Intersection over Union (mIoU), directly accessible in the `datasets`library. IoU represents the overlap of segmentation masks. Mean IoU is the average of the IoU of all semantic classes. Take a look at [this blogpost](https://www.jeremyjordan.me/evaluating-image-segmentation-models/) for an overview of evaluation metrics for image segmentation.
```

Because our model outputs logits with dimensions height/4 and width/4, we have to upscale them before we can compute the mIoU.

```python
import torch
from torch import nn
from datasets import load_metric

metric = load_metric("mean_iou")

def compute_metrics(eval_pred):
  with torch.no_grad():
    logits, labels = eval_pred
    logits_tensor = torch.from_numpy(logits)
    # scale the logits to the size of the label
    logits_tensor = nn.functional.interpolate(
        logits_tensor,
        size=labels.shape[-2:],
        mode="bilinear",
        align_corners=False,
    ).argmax(dim=1)

    pred_labels = logits_tensor.detach().cpu().numpy()
    metrics = metric.compute(predictions=pred_labels, references=labels, 
                                   num_labels=num_labels, 
                                   ignore_index=0,
                                   reduce_labels=feature_extractor.reduce_labels)
    for key, value in metrics.items():
      if type(value) is np.ndarray:
        metrics[key] = value.tolist()
    return metrics
```

> Finally, we can instantiate a trainer object.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, we can instantiate a `Trainer` object.
```

```python
from transformers import Trainer

trainer = Trainer(
    model=model,
    args=training_args,
    train_dataset=train_ds,
    eval_dataset=test_ds,
    optimizers=(optimizer, scheduler),
    compute_metrics=compute_metrics,
)
```

> Now that our trainer set up, training is as simple as calling the `train` function. We don't need to worry about managing our GPU(s), the trainer will take care of that.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now that our trainer is set up, training is as simple as calling the `train` function. We don't need to worry about managing our GPU(s), the trainer will take care of that.
```

```python
trainer.train()
```

When we're done with training, we can push our fine-tuned model and the feature extractor to the Hugging Face hub.

This will also automatically create a model card with our results. We'll supply some extra information in `kwargs` to make the model card more complete.

```python
kwargs = {
    "tags": ["vision", "image-segmentation"],
    "finetuned_from": pretrained_model_name,
    "dataset": hf_dataset_identifier,
}

> trainer.push_to_hub(**kwargs)
> feature_extractor.push_to_hub(hub_model_id)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
feature_extractor.push_to_hub(hub_model_id)
trainer.push_to_hub(**kwargs)
```
This will be a lot faster, as otherwise the model is cloned first before pushing the feature extractor (I've filed a Github issue to resolve this 😅 )

```

# 4. Inference

Now comes the exciting part, using our fine-tuned model! In this section, we'll show how you can load your model from the hub and use it for inference. 

However, you can also try out your model directly on the Hugging Face Hub, thanks to the cool widgets powered by the [hosted inference API](https://api-inference.huggingface.co/docs/python/html/index.html). If you pushed your model to the hub in the previous step, you should see an inference widget on your model page. You can add default examples to the widget by defining example image URLs in your model card. See [this model card](https://huggingface.co/segments-tobias/segformer-b0-finetuned-segments-sidewalk/blob/main/README.md) as an example.

## Use the model from the hub

We'll first load the model from the hub using `SegformerForSemanticSegmentation.from_pretrained()`.

> 
> 
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

<figure class="image table text-center m-0 w-full">
  <medium-zoom background="rgba(1,1,1,1)" alt="SegFormer prediction vs the ground truth" src="assets/54_fine_tune_segformer/output.png"></medium-zoom>
</figure>

What do you think? Would you send our pizza delivery robot on the road with this segmentation information?

The result might not be perfect yet, but we can always expand our dataset to make the model more robust. We can now also go train a larger SegFormer model, and see how it stacks up.

# 5. Conclusion

That's it! You now know how to create your own image segmentation dataset and how to use it to fine-tune a semantic segmentation model.

We introduced you to some useful tools along the way, such as:

*   [Segments.ai](https://segments.ai) for labeling your data
*   [🤗 datasets](https://huggingface.co/docs/datasets/) for creating and sharing a dataset
*   [🤗 transformers](https://huggingface.co/transformers) for easily fine-tuning a state-of-the-art segmentation model
*   [🤗 hub](https://huggingface.co/docs/hub/main) for sharing our dataset and model, and for creating an inference widget for our model

> We hope you enjoyed this post and learned something. Feel free to share your own model with us on Twitter ( [@TobiasCornille](https://twitter.com/tobiascornille),[@NielsRogge](https://twitter.com/nielsrogge), and [@huggingface](https://twitter.com/huggingface)).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We hope you enjoyed this post and learned something. Feel free to share your own model with us on Twitter ([@TobiasCornille](https://twitter.com/tobiascornille),[@NielsRogge](https://twitter.com/nielsrogge), and [@huggingface](https://twitter.com/huggingface)).
```

            <span class="bg-gray-100 rounded px-1 text-gray-600 text-sm font-mono">guest</span>
        </div>
    </a>
    <a href="/nielsr">
        <img class="avatar avatar-user" src="https://avatars.githubusercontent.com/u/48327001?v=4" width="100" title="Gravatar">
        <div class="bfc">
            <code>nielsr</code>
            <span class="fullname">Niels Rogge</span>
        </div>
    </a>
</div>

<a target="_blank" href="https://colab.research.google.com/drive/1BImTyBjW3KtvHGVcjGpYYFZdRGXzM3-j?usp=sharing">
    <img src="https://colab.research.google.com/assets/colab-badge.svg" alt="Open In Colab"/>
</a>

**This blogpost shows how you can fine-tune a semantic segmentation model with a custom dataset. Our goal is to build a model for a pizza delivery robot, so it can see where to drive and recognize obstacles 🍕🤖. First, we'll label a dataset of sidewalk images and upload the results to the Hugging Face hub using [Segments.ai](https://segments.ai?utm_source=hf&utm_medium=colab&utm_campaign=sem_seg). Then we'll use the dataset to fine-tune a pre-trained Segformer model using [`🤗 transformers`](https://huggingface.co/transformers).**

> 

Reviewer 2: Lost of blog posts exist out there that explain the exact same thing but with other frameworks. Maybe try to focus more on our strengths or some users might just stop at the beginning of the post. We're free, open source, have the biggest model and dataset catalog, have an amazing community, have nice integrations with all the deep learning frameworks you can think of, etc.

Reviewer: I would mention SegFormer here, as there's no other library that makes this state-of-the-art model that easily accessible.

Reviewer 2: Definitely +1 !

Reviewer: The other blog post was called "fine-tune ViT for image classification", maybe we should call this one "fine-tune SegFormer for semantic segmentation"?

Author: Makes sense, will rework this paragraph a little in a minute.
However, I wouldn't change the title personally, since SegFormer is not as general/well-known as something like ViT, and the blog post can actually be applied to future semantic segmentation models on HF as well. Many [new similar models](https://paperswithcode.com/sota/semantic-segmentation-on-ade20k) are popping up, so I wouldn't limit the title to SegFormer.

We went ahead and captured images on sidewalks at some locations in Belgium. Here are some examples of the raw images.

<figure class="image table text-center m-0 w-full">
  <medium-zoom background="rgba(0,0,0,.7)" alt="Example images from the sidewalk dataset" src="assets/54_fine_tune_segformer/sidewalk-examples.png"></medium-zoom>
</figure>

To obtain segmentation labels, we need to indicate the classes of all the regions/objects in these images. This can be a time-consuming endeavour, but using the right tools can speed up the task significantly. For labeling, we'll use [Segments.ai](https://segments.ai?utm_source=hf&utm_medium=colab&utm_campaign=sem_seg), since it has smart labeling tools for image segmentation, and an easy-to-use Python SDK.

### Set up the labeling task on Segments.ai

First, create an account at [https://segments.ai/join](https://segments.ai/join?utm_source=hf&utm_medium=colab&utm_campaign=sem_seg). 
Next, create a new dataset and upload your images. You can either do this from the web interface, or via the Python SDK (see the [notebook](https://colab.research.google.com/drive/1BImTyBjW3KtvHGVcjGpYYFZdRGXzM3-j?usp=sharing)).

### Label the images

> Now that the raw data is loaded, go to [segments.ai/home](https://segments.ai/home) and open the newly created dataset. Click "Start labeling" and create segmentation masks. You can use the ML-powered superpixel and autosegment tools to label faster.

Reviewer 2: How many images do you need to label for your model to start having good performance ? How much time does it take ? At this point of the blog post, as a reader idk if I just started a 5h tutorial or a 10min one.

Also maybe mention that if you don't want to label images, you can use the dataset we labeled ourselves for this and continue with the rest of the blog post

Author: Good point. I think it really depends on the use case though: how many categories do you want to label, how similar are the different situations your model has to be able to perform in, how complex are the images themselves?
Segmenting an image can take from 5 seconds to a couple of minutes, depending on the complexity.
Do you have a minimum number in mind we should mention @NielsRogge ?

The introduction of section 1. mentions the following, so that should suffice, right?
> If you just want to use our finished labeled dataset, you can skip the "Create your own dataset" section and continue from "Use a dataset from the Hub".

Reviewer 2: > The introduction of section 1. mentions the following, so that should suffice, right?
> 
> > If you just want to use our finished labeled dataset, you can skip the "Create your own dataset" section and continue from "Use a dataset from the Hub".

Ah yes indeed ! thanks

Author: I added this disclaimer:

> We went ahead and captured a thousand images of sidewalks in Belgium. Collecting and labeling such a dataset can take a long time, so you can also start with a smaller dataset, and expand it if the model does not perform well enough.

I wanted to emphasize that you don't need 1000 images to try out the notebook. You can start with a small dataset, see how it performs, and then add extra images for the failure cases.

```python
hf_dataset_identifier = "segments/sidewalk-semantic"
```

# 2. Load and prepare the Hugging Face dataset for training

Now that we've created a new dataset and pushed it to the Hugging Face Hub, we can load the dataset in a single line.

```python
from datasets import load_dataset

ds = load_dataset(hf_dataset_identifier)
```

Let's shuffle the dataset and split the dataset in a train and test set.

```python
ds = ds.shuffle(seed=1)
ds = ds["train"].train_test_split(test_size=0.2)
train_ds = ds["train"]
test_ds = ds["test"]
```

We'll extract the number of labels and the human-readable ids, so we can configure the segmentation model correctly later on.

```python
import json
from huggingface_hub import cached_download, hf_hub_url

repo_id = f"datasets/{hf_dataset_identifier}"
filename = "id2label.json"
id2label = json.load(open(cached_download(hf_hub_url(repo_id, filename)), "r"))
id2label = {int(k): v for k, v in id2label.items()}
label2id = {v: k for k, v in id2label.items()

num_labels = len(id2label)

> ```

Reviewer 2: We're thinking of storing the class labels directly as metadata of the "label" column, so in the future this part won't be necessary: https://github.com/huggingface/datasets/issues/3838

    learning_rate=lr,
    num_train_epochs=epochs,
    per_device_train_batch_size=batch_size,
    per_device_eval_batch_size=batch_size,
    save_total_limit=3,
    evaluation_strategy="steps",
    save_strategy="steps",
    save_steps=20,
    eval_steps=20,
    logging_steps=1,
    eval_accumulation_steps=5,
    load_best_model_at_end=True,
    push_to_hub=True,
    hub_model_id=hub_model_id,
    hub_strategy="end",
)
```

Next, we'll define a function that computes the evaluation metric we want to work with. Because we're doing semantic segmentation, we'll use the mean Intersection over Union (mIoU), directly accessible in the `datasets` library (see [here](https://huggingface.co/metrics/mean_iou)). IoU represents the overlap of segmentation masks. Mean IoU is the average of the IoU of all semantic classes. Take a look at [this blogpost](https://www.jeremyjordan.me/evaluating-image-segmentation-models/) for an overview of evaluation metrics for image segmentation.

Because our model outputs logits with dimensions height/4 and width/4, we have to upscale them before we can compute the mIoU.

```python
import torch
from torch import nn
from datasets import load_metric

> metric = load_metric("mean_iou")

Reviewer 2: This metric hasn't been released in `datasets` yet. It will be included in `datasets` 2.0 that will be released early next week

Author: Datasets automatically picks it from the master branch, so I don't think it's necessary to wait for the release

Reviewer 2: Ah yes indeed ^^ it's all good then

Because semantic segmentation is a type of classification, the network architectures that are used for image classification and semantic segmentation are very similar. In 2014, [a seminal paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/1411.4038) by Long et al. used convolutional neural networks for semantic segmentation. More recently, Transformers have been used for image classification (e.g. [ViT](https://huggingface.co/blog/fine-tune-vit)), and now they're also being used for semantic segmentation, pushing the state-of-the-art further.

[SegFormer](https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers/model_doc/segformer) is a model for semantic segmentation introduced by Xie et al in 2021. It has a hierarchical Transformer encoder that doesn't use positional encodings (in contrast to ViT) and a simple multi-layer perceptron decoder. SegFormer achieves state-of-the-art performance on multiple common datasets. Let's see how it performs for sidewalk images in our pizza delivery robot.

<figure class="image table text-center m-0 w-full">

>   <medium-zoom background="rgba(0,0,0,.7)" alt="Pizza delivery robot segmenting a scene" src="assets/54_fine_tune_segformer/pizza-scene.png"></medium-zoom>

Author: Done! @osanseviero I also changed the gif for an MP4 that acts like a gif. I tried it out on your blog using dev tools, and it seems to work. Let me know if you want me to revert this change.

*Note that the conversion can take a while, depending on the size of your dataset.*

```python
from segments.huggingface import release2dataset

release = segments_client.get_release(dataset_identifier, release_name)
hf_dataset = release2dataset(release)
```

If we inspect the features of the new dataset, we can see the image column and the corresponding label. The label consists of two parts: a list of annotations and a segmentation bitmap. The annotation corresponds to the different objects in the image. For each object, the annotation contains an `id` and a `category_id`. The segmentation bitmap is an image where each pixel contains the `id` of the object at that pixel. More information can be found in the [relevant docs](https://docs.segments.ai/reference/sample-and-label-types/label-types#segmentation-labels).

> For semantic segmentation, we need a semantic bitmap with a `category_id` for each pixel. We'll use the `get_semantic_bitmap` function from the Segments.ai SDK to convert the bitmaps to semantic bitmaps. In order to apply this function to all the rows in our dataset, we'll use [`dataset.map`](https://huggingface.co/docs/datasets/package_reference/main_classes#datasets.Dataset.map). 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We need a semantic bitmap with a `category_id` for each pixel for semantic segmentation. We'll use the `get_semantic_bitmap` function from the Segments.ai SDK to convert the bitmaps to semantic bitmaps. To apply this function to all the rows in our dataset, we'll use [`dataset.map`](https://huggingface.co/docs/datasets/package_reference/main_classes#datasets.Dataset.map). 
```

```python
from segments.utils import get_semantic_bitmap

def convert_segmentation_bitmap(example):
    return {
        "label.segmentation_bitmap":
            get_semantic_bitmap(
                example["label.segmentation_bitmap"],
                example["label.annotations"],
                id_increment=0,
            )
    }

semantic_dataset = hf_dataset.map(
    convert_segmentation_bitmap,
)
```

> You can also rewrite the `convert_segmentation_bitmap` function to use batches and pass `batched=True` to `dataset.map`. This will speed up the mapping significantly, but you might need to tweak the `batch_size` to make sure the process doesn't run out of memory.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You can also rewrite the `convert_segmentation_bitmap` function to use batches and pass `batched=True` to `dataset.map`. This will significantly speed up the mapping, but you might need to tweak the `batch_size` to ensure the process doesn't run out of memory.
```

> The SegFormer model we're going to fine-tune later expects certain names for the features. For convenience, we'll already match this format now. Thus, we'll rename the `image` feature to `pixel_values`, the `label.segmentation_bitmap` to `label` and discard the other features.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The SegFormer model we're going to fine-tune later expects specific names for the features. For convenience, we'll match this format now. Thus, we'll rename the `image` feature to `pixel_values` and the `label.segmentation_bitmap` to `label` and discard the other features.
```

```python
semantic_dataset = semantic_dataset.rename_column('image', 'pixel_values')
semantic_dataset = semantic_dataset.rename_column('label.segmentation_bitmap', 'label')
semantic_dataset = semantic_dataset.remove_columns(['name', 'uuid', 'status', 'label.annotations'])
```

> We can now push the transformed dataset to the Hugging Face Hub. That way, your team and the Hugging Face community can make use of it. In the next section, we'll see how you can load the dataset from the hub.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We can now push the transformed dataset to the Hugging Face Hub. That way, your team and the Hugging Face community can make use of it. In the next section, we'll see how you can load the dataset from the Hub.
```

train_ds.set_transform(train_transforms)
test_ds.set_transform(val_transforms)
```

# 3. Fine-tune a SegFormer model

## Load the model to fine-tune

The SegFormer authors define 5 models with increasing sizes: B0 to B5. The following chart (taken from the original paper) shows the performance of these different models on the ADE20K dataset, compared to other models.

<figure class="image table text-center m-0 w-full">
  <medium-zoom background="rgba(0,0,0,.7)" alt="SegFormer model variants compared with other segmentation models" src="assets/54_fine_tune_segformer/segformer.png"></medium-zoom>
  <figcaption><a href="https://arxiv.org/abs/2105.15203">Source</a></figcaption>
</figure>

Here, we'll load the smallest SegFormer model (B0), pre-trained on ImageNet-1k. It's only about 14MB in size!
Using a small model will make sure that our model can run smoothly on our pizza delivery robot.

```python
from transformers import SegformerForSemanticSegmentation

pretrained_model_name = "nvidia/mit-b0" 
model = SegformerForSemanticSegmentation.from_pretrained(
    pretrained_model_name,
    num_labels=num_labels,
    id2label=id2label,
    label2id=label2id
)
```

## Set up the Trainer

> To fine-tune the model on our data, we'll use Hugging Face's [Trainer API](https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers/main_classes/trainer). In order to use a Trainer, we need to set up the training configuration, and an evalutation metric.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To fine-tune the model on our data, we'll use Hugging Face's [Trainer API](https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers/main_classes/trainer). We need to set up the training configuration and an evalutation metric to use a Trainer.
```

    logits_tensor = torch.from_numpy(logits)
    # scale the logits to the size of the label
    logits_tensor = nn.functional.interpolate(
        logits_tensor,
        size=labels.shape[-2:],
        mode="bilinear",
        align_corners=False,
    ).argmax(dim=1)

    pred_labels = logits_tensor.detach().cpu().numpy()
    metrics = metric.compute(predictions=pred_labels, references=labels, 
                                   num_labels=num_labels, 
                                   ignore_index=0,
                                   reduce_labels=feature_extractor.reduce_labels)
    for key, value in metrics.items():
      if type(value) is np.ndarray:
        metrics[key] = value.tolist()
    return metrics
```

Finally, we can instantiate a `Trainer` object.

```python
from transformers import Trainer

trainer = Trainer(
    model=model,
    args=training_args,
    train_dataset=train_ds,
    eval_dataset=test_ds,
    compute_metrics=compute_metrics,
)
```

Now that our trainer is set up, training is as simple as calling the `train` function. We don't need to worry about managing our GPU(s), the trainer will take care of that.

```python
trainer.train()
```

> When we're done with training, we can push our fine-tuned model and the feature extractor to the Hugging Face hub.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When we're done with training, we can push our fine-tuned model and the feature extractor to the Hub.
```

This will also automatically create a model card with our results. We'll supply some extra information in `kwargs` to make the model card more complete.

```python
kwargs = {
    "tags": ["vision", "image-segmentation"],
    "finetuned_from": pretrained_model_name,
    "dataset": hf_dataset_identifier,
}

feature_extractor.push_to_hub(hub_model_id)
trainer.push_to_hub(**kwargs)
```

# 4. Inference

Now comes the exciting part, using our fine-tuned model! In this section, we'll show how you can load your model from the hub and use it for inference. 

> However, you can also try out your model directly on the Hugging Face Hub, thanks to the cool widgets powered by the [hosted inference API](https://api-inference.huggingface.co/docs/python/html/index.html). If you pushed your model to the hub in the previous step, you should see an inference widget on your model page. You can add default examples to the widget by defining example image URLs in your model card. See [this model card](https://huggingface.co/segments-tobias/segformer-b0-finetuned-segments-sidewalk/blob/main/README.md) as an example.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
However, you can also try out your model directly on the Hugging Face Hub, thanks to the cool widgets powered by the [hosted inference API](https://api-inference.huggingface.co/docs/python/html/index.html). If you pushed your model to the Hub in the previous step, you should see an inference widget on your model page. You can add default examples to the widget by defining example image URLs in your model card. See [this model card](https://huggingface.co/segments-tobias/segformer-b0-finetuned-segments-sidewalk/blob/main/README.md) as an example.
```

<figure class="image table text-center m-0 w-full">
  <medium-zoom background="rgba(0,0,0,.7)" alt="Inference widget" src="assets/54_fine_tune_segformer/widget.png"></medium-zoom>
</figure>

> ## Use the model from the hub

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Use the model from the Hub
```

> We'll first load the model from the hub using `SegformerForSemanticSegmentation.from_pretrained()`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We'll first load the model from the Hub using `SegformerForSemanticSegmentation.from_pretrained()`.
```

)

# Second, apply argmax on the class dimension
pred_seg = upsampled_logits.argmax(dim=1)[0]
```

Now it's time to display the result. We'll display the result next to the ground-truth mask.

<figure class="image table text-center m-0 w-full">
  <medium-zoom background="rgba(1,1,1,1)" alt="SegFormer prediction vs the ground truth" src="assets/54_fine_tune_segformer/output.png"></medium-zoom>
</figure>

What do you think? Would you send our pizza delivery robot on the road with this segmentation information?

The result might not be perfect yet, but we can always expand our dataset to make the model more robust. We can now also go train a larger SegFormer model, and see how it stacks up.

# 5. Conclusion

That's it! You now know how to create your own image segmentation dataset and how to use it to fine-tune a semantic segmentation model.

We introduced you to some useful tools along the way, such as:

*   [Segments.ai](https://segments.ai) for labeling your data
*   [🤗 datasets](https://huggingface.co/docs/datasets/) for creating and sharing a dataset
*   [🤗 transformers](https://huggingface.co/transformers) for easily fine-tuning a state-of-the-art segmentation model

> *   [🤗 hub](https://huggingface.co/docs/hub/main) for sharing our dataset and model, and for creating an inference widget for our model

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
*   [Hugging Face Hub](https://huggingface.co/docs/hub/main) for sharing our dataset and model, and for creating an inference widget for our model
```
